DOCS-13012-mule-data-types-v4.4-cv (#2152)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/mule-data-types.adoc

== Mule Data Types

Mule runtime engine uses a typed data structure called `TypedValue` that centralizes data access across different components. This data structure provides access to both the actual data and its data type. The data type consists of two values, the MIME type and the encoding of the data.

=== Input Data

> Mule stores all variables and the payload using the `TypedValue` data structure. Also, operations like `List` from the File connector return their result as a `TypedValue` instance, enabling DataWeave to list different types of files (JSON, XML, CSV, and so on) to read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mule stores all variables and the payload using the `TypedValue` data structure. Also, operations like `List` from the Anypoint Platform File Connector return their results as `TypedValue` instances, enabling DataWeave to list different types of files (JSON, XML, CSV, and so on) to read.
```

=== Output Data

DataWeave always outputs a `TypedValue` instance. DataWeave decides what writer to use based on the data type of the `TypedValue` instance. However, you can manually specify the data type in a DataWeave script by using the `output` directive.

> If the script that Mule is executing is assigned to a message processing field, Mule informs  DataWeave what is the expected type based on the metadata of that field. For example, if it is a Plain Old Java Object (Pojo) then DataWeave knows what class to instantiate and to use the Java Writer to generate the output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the script that Mule is executing is assigned to a message processing field, Mule informs DataWeave which type of data to expect type based on the metadata of that field. For example, if <<the metadata? the data type?>> is a Plain Old Java Object (Pojo), then DataWeave knows not only which class to instantiate but also that it must use the Java writer to generate the output.
```

Reviewer: Whether to use `what` or `which` is one of those tricky questions in English grammar. Basically, If you are trying to make a choice, `what` is used to ask when there are _an unknown number or infinite possibilities_ for an answer. `Which` is used if you are choosing between a _more limited number of items, already defined_.

== How DataWeave Uses Mule Data Types

> DataWeave uses the data type contained in the `TypedValue` instance to determine what reader to use, based on the MIME type, and how to configure that reader (encoding, reader properties) based on the MIME type properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DataWeave uses the data type contained in the `TypedValue` instance to determine which reader to use, based on the MIME type, and how to configure that reader (encoding, reader properties), based on the MIME type properties.
```

When DataWeave cannot determine the data type, it follows this procedure:

> . Verifies what input types the script is using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Verifies which input types the script is using.
```

+

> If all inputs are compatible or of the same data type, DataWeave uses that data type. For example, if the script contains `<set-payload value="#[payload.someValue]/>` DataWeave examines the data type of the payload and, if the payload is JSON, DataWeave uses the JSON writer. If there are more than one input in the script and they are from different data types, DataWeave throws an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all inputs are compatible or of the same data type, DataWeave uses that data type. For example, if the script contains `<set-payload value="#[payload.someValue]/>`, DataWeave examines the data type of the payload and, if the payload is JSON, DataWeave uses the JSON writer. If there is more than one input in the script and they are from different data types, DataWeave throws an error.
```

+

> For example, if the script contains `<set-payload value="#[payload.someValue ++ vars.myVar]/>` and `vars.myBar` is of type XML and `payload` is of type JSON, DataWeave throws an error. In some cases, specifically when working with XML, an expression on a Set payload operation fails because it generates an invalid XML structure.

Reviewer: Did you mean `vars.myVar` where the text now uses `vars.myBar`?
```suggestion
For example, if the script contains `<set-payload value="#[payload.someValue ++ vars.myVar]/>`, in which `vars.myBar` is of type XML and `payload` is of type JSON, DataWeave throws an error. In some cases, specifically when working with XML, an expression in a Set payload operation fails because it generates an invalid XML structure.
```

. If no input is used, DataWeave uses the Java writer.
+

> For example, when DataWeave reads the following script: `<set-payload value="#[\{a: true}]/>`,  it uses the Java writer to output a `java.util.Map` object with an entry containing ("a", true).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, when DataWeave reads the script `<set-payload value="#[\{a: true}]/>`,  it uses the Java writer to output a `java.util.Map` object with an entry containing ("a", true).
```

+

> For the Logger message processor, DataWeave has a special feature to avoid errors when creating the output. First, DataWeave tries to determine what input types the script is using and uses the corresponding writer to generate the output. If DataWeave fails because the writer cannot create that data structure, then DataWeave uses the DataWeave writer that can output any possible data structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the Logger message processor, DataWeave has a special feature to avoid errors when creating the output. First, DataWeave tries to determine which input types the script is using, and then it uses the corresponding writer to generate the output. If DataWeave fails because the writer cannot create that data structure, then DataWeave uses the DataWeave writer, which can output any possible data structure.
```
